---
description: The hidden cost of using an IDE
date: '2004-11-21 23:19:12'
permalink: 2004/11/ides
redirect_from: posts/2004/11/ides
title: The IDE Divide
categories: [Essays, Software Development]
tags: essays
---

The developer world is divided into two camps. Language mavens wax rhapsodic
about the power of higher-level programming --- first-class functions, staged
programming, AOP, MOPs, and reflection. Tool mavens are skilled at the use of
integrated build and debug tools, integrated documentation, code completion,
refactoring, and code comprehension. Language mavens tend to use a text editor
such as emacs or vim --- these editors are more likely to work for new
languages. Tool mavens tend to use IDEs such as Visual Studio, Eclipse, or
IntelliJ, that integrate a variety of development tools[^1].

![](http://images.osteele.com/2004/ide/language-evolution.png)

New languages, such as [Laszlo](http://openlaszlo.org) and
[Groovy](http://groovy.codehaus.org/), and new language extensions, such as
[AOP](http://aosd.net/), are typically available for text-editor-only
development before they have support within an IDE[^2]. After a while, if the
language or extension is successful, the tools [catch up](/2004/11/ide4laszlo).
This isn't just because it's harder to implement a tool than just a language.
It's because language expertise and tool expertise are to a certain extent
alternatives, that each reinforce themselves to the exclusion of the other.
Here's why.

## Language-Maven Perspective

If you've spent most of your time learning about languages and how to use them,
your picture of the world may look like this:

![](http://images.osteele.com/2004/ide/language-stack.png)

In this diagram, the choice of language can make a great deal of difference to
your productivity, because you know how to apply each language feature to a
variety of situations. The choice of IDE, on the other hand, doesn't matter
much, because you're mostly using the IDE for its text editor --- maybe with a
little bit of compilation support thrown in, but not for the whole set of modern
IDE features that a modern tool maven uses.

## Tool-Maven Perspective

Conversely, if you've spent most of your time mastering the development tools of
your trade, you understand what it's like to get into a flow state with an
integrated editor and debugger, and to go at a program with refactoring and code
comprehension tools at your disposal. Your picture of the world may look like
this:

![](http://images.osteele.com/2004/ide/ide-stack.png)

An IDE presents huge advantages relative to a simple text editor, for you. The
choice of programming language, on the other hand, doesn't matter that much ---
you're mostly working with the same old classes and methods, statements and
expressions, in any of them, and the real development power comes from the IDE.

## Two Camps

Why can't one be a language maven _and_ a tool maven? It's hard. One reason is
that developers have limited time, especially for learning new skills. You can
use any given block of time to master language features, or to master
development tools. Each of these choices contributes to a positive feedback
cycle, but they're competing cycles, so they create divided camps.

![](http://images.osteele.com/2004/ide/mavens.png)

Taking the time to learn language features puts you in a position to appreciate
the features of new languages. You can then adopt a language before tools
support it, because you don't rely on the tools for your productivity anyway.
And it's worth adopting these tools early, because their features are valuable
to you --- making use of them is where your expertise lies.

Invest the time in mastering development tools, on the other hand, and you won't
want to give these tools up to try a new language --- the development tools are
a major part of your productivity. For you, a new language doesn't have many
advantages over other languages anyway, because you haven't studied how to use
language features to make you productive.

This means that the more you invest in language features, the more they benefit
you, to the exclusion of tool features --- and vice versa. And this is what
creates the two camps, with two perspectives on the relative merits of language
features and tool support:

![](http://images.osteele.com/2004/ide/two-perspectives.png)

## Language Buffet

At any given time, the editor-only developer is in a position to choose from a
wider selection of languages --- because, at any given time, more languages have
a compiler and a runtime, than a compiler and a runtime _and_ a language-aware
editor _and_ and debugger _and etc._. The diagram below shows what this looks
like for a number of languages at different points in their evolution. Within
each language, the line at the end of the red transition marks the point at
which it has acquired enough features to be useful for some class of
programming. The line at the end of the purple transition marks the point at
which tool support (beyond a compiler and runtime) exists for it too. At any
time, more languages are programmable (the red squares) than have tool support
(the blue squares).

![](http://images.osteele.com/2004/ide/language-adoption-timeslice.png)

One consequence of the greater language selection available to the editor-only
developer is it typically includes languages that are more _powerful_. So while
one reason that the "Language" block is bigger in the "langauge maven"
illustration above (reproduced below) is that the language maven dedicates more
time to learning how to leverage language features, the other reason is that the
language maven may have a more powerful language to work with, because there are
more languages available to her.

![](http://images.osteele.com/2004/ide/language-stack.png)

## The Language Developers Dilemma

In fact, the _most_ powerful languages may initially have the _least_ powerful
tool support. The reason for this is that the language developer, like the
language adopter, has to make a choice: whether to dedicate limited development
resources towards language features, or towards tool support[^3].

Consider the diagram below. This diagram represents three languages, whose
respective developers have chosen to concentrate initially on language features
(the top arrow), on tool support (the left arrow), or (the middle arrow) a
middle-of-the-road strategy that emphasizes them both equally. The arrows are
roughly the same length, representing roughly equal amounts of effort.

![](http://images.osteele.com/2004/ide/feature-tool-first-choice.png)

Although the arrows are equal length, they achieve different levels of language
features and tool support. The "language-first" strategy of language development
achieves a greater degree of language features, as indicated by the red tics
across the bottom, but a lesser degree of tool support, as indicated by the blue
tics across the right. And conversely for the tool-first strategy.

Of course, if a language succeeds, it will eventually get tool support. So in
the long run both the language and the tool mavens will use the popular
languages, such as Java. That's where [I'm hoping we're
going](http:/archives/2004/11/ide4laszlo) with Laszlo.

![](http://images.osteele.com/2004/ide/feature-first-stage-two.png)

## The Perils of the Pioneer

All this makes the language approach sound comparable to the tool approach; it's
just a matter of which skills to learn. But this isn't always true. We could
argue about whether understanding closures or a source debugger makes one more
productive. But what isn't arguable is that there are penalties, beyond the lack
of tools, to adopting a language early.

One is that the language may not have staying power. Another is that, just as
tools lag initial development, so do other ecosystem artifacts such as books,
articles, newsgroups, and, in the enterprise world, the ability to hire
developers who know a language, or to be hired on the basis of knowing one.

There are contexts where none of these disadvantages matters. If you learn
languages easily, finish projects quickly, and move on to new projects
frequently, it doesn't matter whether a language is going to succeed, so long as
it helps you with your current project. If you learn languages from reading
source code or reference manuals, you don't need the books and articles that
will follow later. And if you're working with a small team (perhaps as small as
one) of [elite developers](http://paulgraham.com/avg.html), you aren't hiring
them for what they already know anyway.

Which isn't to say that you can't be an elite tool maven too, it's just that the
conditions for success are different. You can be the only one on a team to use
Eclipse. If you're the only one on your team using Haskell, something is
probably wrong.

## Comments

Bob Congdon [points
out](http://www.bobcongdon.net/blog/2004/11/dividing-developer-world.html) Lisp
and Smalltalk as counterexamples to the "language developer's dilemma": both are
powerful languages with powerful development environments.

Lisp was a powerful language first, and had a powerful environment second: it
only appears to be an exception because it has been around so much longer than
any other extant language and has had time to acquire both. Smalltalk, however,
is a genuine exception. Smalltalk might be viewed as a step _backwards_ in
language features from Simula 67, and a simultaneous step _forwards_ in tool
support --- but this is holding the language to a higher standard than any
other.

Congdon also points out that it is possible to both a language maven and a tool
maven. True in theory, just as it's possible in principle to become both a
concert pianist and mathematician, but in practice there may not be enough hours
in the day to do both.

And [Harry Fuecks](http://www.sitepoint.com/blog-post-view.php?id=212780)
explains some of what I was trying to say better than I did, as well as adding
points of his own.

## Notes

[^1]: A sophisticated emacs user, who uses something like [psgml-mode](http://www.lysator.liu.se/projects/about_psgml.html) or [jde](http://jdee.sunsite.dk/) for every single language they edit, is arguably in both camps. I haven't met many of those, though. The emacs users I know use it configure it as an HTML-editor or a TEX-editor, say, but use it as a text editor for everything else.

[^2]: C#, with Visual Studio.NET, was an exception --- at least, if you're outside Microsoft. Microsoft is an exception to almost everything.

[^3]: And this is why Microsoft is an exception: because its development resources are effectively unlimited.
