---
description: Htaccess approximates AOP
date: '2004-08-17 03:01:48'
slug: web-aop
title: Aspect-Oriented Programming with mod_rewrite
categories: [Essays, Programming]
tags: meta, programming, essays
---

I spent part of my vacation last month working on my web site. One change I wanted to make was to put a banner on every page, and a directory-specific column on the left. Nothing fancy by web design standards, but an adventure for a hobbyist without a CMS.

The first time I had to make a number of pages with a common template was in [1995](http://www.umass.edu/linguist/), and I wrote a Lisp program to generate them. The next time I made a web site, I used [Barry Warsaw's](http://barry.warsaw.us/index.html) Python program to create some pages. (I still didn't have access to a server with server-side includes.)

Last year when I moved [my site](https://osteele.com) to a [modern server](http://dreamhost.com), I used PHP `include` to add navigation elements to some of the pages. But this time I didn't relish editing a number of HTML files, and, more to the point, I was ready to try something new.

## The Problem

Let's say that `software/index.html` looks like this:

    <h1>This is my software page</h1>
    <p>Welcome to my software page</p>

Furthermore, let's say that there's a file `categories.html` in the same directory:

    <ul class="categories">
      <li><a href="lisp">Lisp software</a></li>
      <li><a href="python">Python software</a></li>
    </ul>

I would like a request for `https://osteele.com/software/index.html` to retrieve this content:

    <html>
    ...
    <ul class="categories">
      <li><a href="lisp">Lisp software</a></li>
      <li><a href="python">Python software</a></li>
    </ul>
    <h1>This is my software page</h1>
    <p>Welcome to my software page</p>
    ...
    </body>
    </html>

where the `...` and `...` are generated by `header.php` and `footer.php`.

A conventional solution would be to modify `index.html` so that it included some header and footer material as well as the actual content:

    <h1>This is my software page</h1>
    <p>Welcome to my software page</p>

Of course, then I have to edit all my other files too, and any new files I add. And if I ever change the header and footer includes, I have to edit them all again. (For example, it's likely that `include('header.php')` will become `include($_ENV['DOCUMENT_ROOT'] . 'header.php')` --- now how many files will I need to touch?)

The `include` lines are _domain-specific boilerplate_. Like all boilerplate, they distract for the content of my source files, they add to the overhead of creating and maintaining the site, and they're a chance for something to go wrong.

It seems backwards to edit the _inside_ of a number of files just to control what gets shown on the _outside_ (before the beginning and after the end). If each of the files is treated the same, something _outside_ the file itself should do the wrapping.

## Wrapping with RewriteRule

I used the Apache [`mod_rewrite` module](http://httpd.apache.org/docs/mod/mod_rewrite.html) to solve this problem. I configured my `.htaccess` file so that a request for a _URL_ with the path `/index.html` is rewritten into a request for the _file_ `/wrap.php`. Within the body of `wrap.php`, the expression `$_ENV['REQUEST_URI']` evaluates to the original path, in this case `/index.html`. The code in `wrap.php` can do whatever it wants with this pathname --- show the original file, show just its name, or process it in some more sophisticated way.

My `.htaccess` file contains the following:

    RewriteEngine On
    RewriteBase /
    RewriteRule ^.*.html$ /wrap.php [QSA]

and `wrap.php` looks like this:

_wrap.php_

    <?php
      $file = $_ENV['DOCUMENT_ROOT'] . $_ENV['REQUEST_URI'];
      $sidebar = dirname($file) . '/sidebar.html';
      include('header.php');
      if (file_exists($sidebar)): include($sidebar); endif;
      include($file);
      include('footer.php');
    ?>

This strategy has several advantages over modifying every content file. The includes can be added or removed from any number of files without editing each file (just modify the regular expression in the `RewriteRule`); the includes don't need to be copy/pasted to each existing file and each new file; and the includes can be maintained separately from the content.

## AOP

The problem that motivated this --- how to inject behavior into a set of source entities without modifying each one --- is the same as one of the motivations for Aspect-Oriented Programming (AOP).

A "Hello World" of AOP is the problem of adding timing code to a set of methods. Adding timing code by hand to a single method is, like the header/footer problem above, a simple matter of wrapping the method's implementation at the source level. A method such as this:

    void f() {
      do_something();
    }

is replaced by this:

    void f() {
      long startTime = System.currentTimeMillis();
      try {
        do_something();
      } finally {
        Logger.logTime(startTime, System.currentTimeMillis());
      }
    }

AOP lets us leave the method body source unchanged, and place the timing code somewhere else (in a method on `Aspect` or `Interceptor`, depending on the AOP framework.) The timing code has a _hole_ in it where the original method is spliced in --- this is like the parameter to a function or macro. The location of this hole is signalled in the source by the `proceed` keyword in [AspectJ](http://eclipse.org/aspectj/), the `JoinPoint.proceed()` method in [AspectWerkz](http://aspectwerkz.codehaus.org/), or the `Invocation.invokeNext()` method in [JBossAOP](http://www.jboss.org/developers/projects/jboss/aop).

Using AOP to insert the timing code has three advantages over modifying the method source: the timing code can be applied and removed without modifying the source; the same timing code can be applied to a number of methods without repeating it; and the timing code can be maintained separately from the methods. These are the same advantages of the `RewriteRule`+PHP solution to wrapper pages.

## RewriteRule and AOP

In the language of AOP, the code that is injected into a program is _advice_. The location where it is injected is a _join point_. A set of locations is a _pointcut_; pointcuts are generally defined as a pattern or predicate that selects locations from a program.

In the timing example, the timing code (`long time = ...`, etc.) is the advice, the `f` method is the join point, and the pointcut is a specification such as `call(void C.f(void))` (in AspectJ, and if `f` is a method on `C`).

In the web page wrapper, the advice is `wrap.php`, the pattern in the `RewriteRule` is the pointcut, and the join points are the URLs that that pattern matches. The statement `include($_ENV['REQUEST_URI'])` in `wrap.php` plays the same role as `proceed` or `invokeNext()` in Java AOP: it specifies where in the advice to insert the code at the join point.

| Concept    | Java example | Web example              |
| :--------- | :----------- | :----------------------- |
| advice     | `time = ...` | `include("header.php");` |
| pointcut   | `call(...)`  | `RewriteRule .*.html`    |
| join point | `f()`        | `/index.html`            |
| hole       | `proceed`    | `include`                |

## Limitations

`RewriteRule`, not surprisingly, doesn't do everything an AOP framework does. One way it falls short is that it only implements advice, not aspects. (An aspect is a set of advices, designed to be applied in concert.) It only implements `around` advice --- although given `around`, it's trivial to implement `before` and `after` by placing the `include` at the beginning or end.

Perhaps most seriously, it's not possible to apply multiple advices to the same file. (Or at least, I haven't figured out how.) In the example above, I listed the rewrite rule as `RewriteRule ^.*.html$ /wrap.php [QSA]`, and used `$_ENV['REQUEST_URI']` in `wrap.php` to retrieve the original URL. Since my actual `.htaccess` contains other rewrite rules too, I actually use `RewriteRule (.*.html)$ /wrap.php?file=$1 [QSA]` to rewrite the URL, and `$_GET['file']` to retrieve the original URL. Either of these methods only works for one rewrite per URL, though.

This limitation means it's not actually possible to factor a number of crosscutting concerns out of a page --- just one. Certain other concerns can be factored out because `RewriteRule` and `RewriteCond` can check request headers and test and set variables, but in general you're stuck with one general-purpose solution (aspects), and a few special-purpose solutions for whatever mod*rewrite handles. Of course, you can always use traditional OO techniques in the server-side code that you \_do* weave together, to handle everything else in a non-AOP manner.

## Summary

There's something of a dancing bear quality to this: `.htaccess` is enough like assembly language that you can implement an approximation of something high-level in it! (I remember being thrilled by Z-80 assembly language as a big step up from Dartmouth Basic, because now I could use subroutines for the first time.)

What I find interesting is that this wasn't the motivation at all. I didn't decide "let's port AOP to `.htaccess`, just to see if it can be done". Instead, I implemented wrapper pages the laziest way I could think of (where "lazy" means I didn't have to do anything repetitive, now or in the future), and the result turned out to be closely analogous to AOP.

The stages of web site generation techniques that I gave at the beginning of this post --- write a program to generate pages statically, use somebody else's static page generation program, generate the pages dynamically, and finally weave the code that does the generation together dynamically --- recapitulates the history of programming techniques in general. First there were a few domain-specific special-purpose code-generators, then compilers for general-purpose static languages, then dynamic languages caught on, and finally --- as the binding time for _everything_, including program construction, gets later --- AOP.

Web programming really is web _programming_.
